---
creationDate: 08-25-2023
modifiedDate: 08-25-2023
---
# <span id="c"><a>[[Period 3 (1754-1800)]]</a></span>

## <span id="sc">Stamp Act</span>
### <span id="sec">British Action</span>
Britain passed the Stamp Act, a tax law requiring colonists to purchase special Stamps to prove tax payment.
### <span id="sec">Colonial Reaction</span>
Colonists harassed stamp distributors, boycotted British goods, and prepared a Declaration of Rights and Grievances.
## <span id="sc">"Sons of Liberty" & "Daughters of Liberty"</span>
Formed to protest British restrictions & became the leaders of colonial resistance. The colonial boycotts were effective & Britain repealed the Stamp Act.
## <span id="sc">1767 Townshed Acts</span>
### <span id="sec">British Action</span>
Britain taxes certain colonial imports and stations troops at major ports to protect customs officers.
### <span id="sec">Colonial Reaction</span>
Colonists protested "taxation without representation" and organized a new boycott of imported goods.
## <span id="sc">Committees of correspondence</span>
Colonists created committees of correspondence to communicate with each other.
## <span id="sc">1770 Boston Massacre</span>
<span id="sec">British Action</span>
British troops stationed in Boston are taunted by an angry mob. The troops fire into the crowd, killing five colonists.
### <span id="sec">Colonial Reaction</span>
Colonial agitators label the conflict a massacre and publish a dramatic engraving depicting the violence.
## <span id="sc">1773 Tea Act</span>
<span id="sec">British Action</span>
Britain gave the East India Company special concessions in the colonial tea business and shut out colonial tea merchants.
### <span id="sec">Colonial Reaction</span>
Colonists in Boston rebelled, dumping 18,000 pounds of East India Company tea into Boston Harbor.
## <span id="sc">1774 Intolerable Acts</span>
<span id="sec">British Action</span>
King George III tightened control over Massachusetts by closing Boston Harbor and quartering troops.
### <span id="sec">Colonial Reaction</span>
Colonial leaders formed the First Continental Congress and drew up a declaration of colonial rights.
## <span id="sc">1775 Lexington and Concord</span>
<span id="sec">British Action</span>
General Gage ordered troops to march to Concord, Massachusetts, and seize colonial weapons.
### <span id="sec">Colonial Reaction</span>
Minutemen intercept the British and engage in battle first at Lexington, and then at Concord.
## <span id="sc">The Enlightenment</span>
- **John Locke** wrote that people have natural rights (life, liberty, & property) & should oppose tyranny
- **Rosseau** believed that citizens have a social contract with their gov't
- **Montesquieu** argued that power should not be in the hands of a king, but separated among gov't branches.
## <span id="sc">Declaration of Independence (July 4, 1776</span>
Explains why they are declaring independence.
### <span id="sec">Decoding the Declaration of Independence</span>
1. We should explain why we are declaring independence.
2. All people have natural rights.
3. Government power comes from the people.
4. If a government cannot protect people, then the people should create a new government that can.
5. King George III has abused his power.
6. These are the reasons we believe that the king has abused his powers.
7. We have explained to the king why we are unhappy but he has ignored us and hurt us.
8. Because of the king's abusive actions, we are declaring our independence as a new nation.
## <span id="sc">How does the revolution affect ideals?</span>
### <span id="sec">Expanding Political Democracy</span>
- Democracy = "Power to the people"
#### <span id="ssec">Slavery & Democracy</span>
**The North**
- The American Revolution meant <span id="i">increased exposure for African AMericans to the concept of liberty.</span>
- In several communities, Black Americans exposed to revolutionary ideas actively resisted white control (e.g., <span id="i">Thomas Jeremiah</span>).
- In much of the North, antislavery sentiments spread.
- <span id="i">In 1780, Pennsylvania</span>, led by the anti-slavery Quakers, became the first state to declare slavery illegal.
- One by one, all Northern states -- except NY and NJ -- abolished slavery (gradually) before the end of the revolution.
**The South**
- exposed the continuing & developing tension.
- tried to justify slavery with the bible.
#### <span id="ssec">Voting Rights</span>
- Property qualifications for voting were gradually removed in some states:
	- 1800: <span id="i">VT, KY & NH</span> granted <span id="i">universal white male suffrage</span>
	- Four additional states restricted voting to white males through taxpaying qualifications.
	- True <span id="i">national republicanism</span>, however, remained largely elusive.
#### <span id="ssec">Women Rights</span>
- The emphasis on liberty and the "rights of man" led some women to question their position in society.
- 1776 <span id="i">Abigail Adams</span> wrote to her husband, <span id="i">"Remember the ladies."</span>
- In 1779, <span id="i">Judith Sargent Murray</span> wrote that women's minds were as good as men, and thus deserved access to education.
- American society began to attribute a higher value to the role of women <span id="i">as mothers</span>.
- The theory of <span id="i">republican motherhood</span> was that the women had an important role in instructing their children <span id="i">in the virtues of republicanism</span>
#### <span id="ssec">International Impact</span>
In 1789 the French Revolution was sparked (13 years after the Declaration Of Independence).
In 1791, the Haitian Revolution broke out.
Led by Toussaint Louverture, over 100,000 revolutionaries.