---
creationDate: 08-25-2023
modifiedDate: 08-25-2023
---
# <span id="c"><a>[[Period 2 (1607-1754)]]</a></span>

## <span id="c">Overview</span>

<span id="i">da</span>

---
## <span id="c">Chapter 2</span>

### <span id="sc">English Colonization</span>

#### <span id="sec">Early Efforts</span>
The first attempt at English colonization was led by Sir Walter Raleigh to colonize Roanoke Island. This attempt failed after the entire colony went missing. Gained the name the "Lost Colony" of Roanoke.

#### <span id="sec">Jamestown</span>
The first permanent and successful English settlement was in 1607. The settlement faced numerous challenges, including conflicts with Native Americans, disease, and famine.

#### <span id="sec">John Smith and John Rolfe</span>

---

### <span id="sc">Development of the Southern Colonies</span>
#### <span id="sec">Maryland - 1632</span>
Established as a safe haven for English Catholics, Maryland also adopted the [[Headright System]].
**Religion**: <span id="i">Protestantism</span>
**Government**: <span id="i">Lords Proprietors (and Royal Governors. in 1692)</span>

#### <span id="sec">Carolina -  1663</span>
Initially founded for its strategic importance, it eventually split into North and South Carolina, each with its distinct economy and social structure

The Carolinas unofficially split in 1712 as they had differences in how they ran things and it became hard for one government to manage everything. Differences such as economies, geographies, and populations.
##### North Carolina - 1729 (1712)
**Religion**: <span id="i">Church of England (Anglicanism)</span>
**Government**: <span id="i">Lords Proprietors and appointed Royal Governors.</span>
Had more of a <span id="i">decentralized</span> government which better suited their population of small, independent farms.

##### South Carolina - 1729 (1712)
**Religion**: <span id="i">Church of England (Anglicanism)</span>
**Government**: <span id="i">Lords Proprietors and appointed Royal Governors.</span>
Had more of a <span id="i">centralized</span> government which was largely influenced by wealthy plantation owners. They had lots of cash crops that needed hard labor to yield and so they were big on plantations and slave labor.

#### <span id="sec">Georgia - 1732</span>
The last of the 13 colonies. It was founded as a buffer against Spanish Florida and as a place for debtors and the poor.
**Religion**: <span id="i">Church of England (Anglicanism)</span>
**Government**: <span id="i">Controlled by trustees located in London</span>
#### <span id="sec">Virginia - 1607</span>
We already had Virginia from Jamestown.
**Religion**: <span id="i">Church of England (Anglicanism)</span>
**Government**: <span id="i">Proprietary colony</span>

### <span id="sc">English Colonization in New England</span>
#### <span id="sec">Plymouth and the Pilgrims</span>
Pilgrims, who were separatists from the Church of England, <span id="i">founded Plymouth in 1620</span>

---

## <span id="c">Chapter 4</span>

### <span id="sc">Life in the Chesapeake Region</span>

- <span id="i">Life was very poor. </span>
- <span id="i">Most of the immigrants were young men in their teens or twenties.</span> 
- <span id="i">The men outnumbered the women six to one.</span>
- <span id="i">No families really.</span>
- <span id="i">The terrain was murky and nasty.</span>

---

### <span id="sc">The Tobacco Economy</span>

- <span id="i">Tobacco was a huge money maker. Often profit-hungry settlers would plant tobacco before they planted food.</span>
- <span id="i">Some ships hauled over 1.5 million pounds of Tobacco.</span>
- <span id="i">This intense Tobacco planting exhausted the soil. Causing the farmers to move farther up causing more conflict with the Indians.</span>

Planting all this tobacco means we need more <span id="i">labor.</span> Where should we get this labor? Slaves were too expensive, Indians died too quickly, and there were hardly any families at all. So let's look to <span id="i">Indentured servants.</span> In exchange, they <span id="i">received transatlantic passage and eventual “freedom dues", including a few barrels of corn, a suit of clothes, and perhaps a small parcel of land. </span> Both Virginia and Maryland employed the "[[headright system]]" which essentially gave each <span id="i">settler 50 acres of land for themselves and an additional 50 acres for every person they brought along (e.g. servants).</span> The system was used to encourage the colonization of America. Often servants that earned their freedom would <span id="i">come out penniless and go back to working for their former masters for low wages.</span>

---

### <span id="sc">Frustrated Freeman and Bacon's rebellion 💪</span>

A lot of young free men were now wandering the Chesapeake region as of the late seventeenth century. <span id="i">These men were frustrated due to their broken dreams of owning land as well as their failures in acquiring spouses.</span> The governor doesn't like the free men. The <span id="i">Virginia Assembly disenfranchised them.</span>

#### <span id="sec">Bacon's rebellion</span>
Led 1,000 Virginias in a rebellion against Governor Berkeley. Rebels resented Berkeley's close relations with Indians. Berkeley monopolized the fur trade with the Indians in the area.

- Rebels attacked Indians, whether they were friendly or not to whites.
- Governor Berkeley was driven from Jamestown.
- They burned the capital.
	- Rebels went on a rampage of plundering.
- Bacon suddenly died of fever.


#### <span id="sec">Results of Bacon's Rebellion</span>
It exposed resentment between inland frontiersmen and landless former servants against the gentry on coastal plantations.
- Socioeconomic class differences/ clashes between rural and urban communities would continue throughout American history.

---

### <span id="sc">Colonial Slavery</span>

After Bacon's rebellion, they no longer wanted to use indentured servants for labor for many reasons such as:
- Potential for unrest (Might have another revolt)
	
- Decreasing supply (England started to improve by reducing the number of people wanting to indenture themselves to get free passage to the new colony)
	
- High Turnover (Indentured servants were only servants for a little while and then they received freedom dues and became free citizens)
	
- Racial perceptions and Control (don't have to explain this one)
	
- Economic Efficiency (As the tobacco farming in Virginia increased they needed a stable long-term labor source)
	
- Legal Changes (Such as the lifelong servitude of African Americans and their children being slaves)

Slaves would usually be captured by African coastal tribes that would then sell them to European colonizers from the New World. After a while the African Americans started outnumbering the white population quite a bit. The law got very specific on what constitutes a slave and what constitutes and indentured servant. These new "slave codes" made the slave a slave for life as well as their children slaves for life.

---



---